[Music]
Good.
>> Okay, we're going to call this meeting
to order. Uh this is a special meeting
of the board of trustees uh to go over
the budget agenda for this coming up
year. Uh, anyone who wants to uh follow
along at home on the computer can go to
www.youtube.com
usergocc
want to welcome everyone that's here
today. Go ahead call the role
>> Mr.
>> here.
>> Mrs. Rob
>> present
>> Mr. Mendes
>> here
>> Mrs. Mo
>> Dr. Brown
>> here
>> Mr. here.
>> Miss will join us shortly.
>> Right.
Uh item number four, open forum. I don't
think there's anybody that wants to talk
to us. So we'll go right into number
five.
Discussion. The four is yours, Mr.
>> Judge Hagerty. I' I'd just let the board
know. This is our usual of our board
budget workshops that we be bring to the
board annually. Um, we knew we weren't
gonna we weren't going to ask the board
to entertain a tuition increase. Uh,
normally we would have br if we were
going to entertain a a tuition increase,
we would have come to the board in
February for a tuition increase. We did
not anticipate needing to bring to the
board a tuition increase. Um, we've had
a lot of moving parts. uh the state just
provided us their near I say in quotes
near final run um based on house bill 8
and then um some legislation that passed
this session. So I was able to provide
the near final run for for El Paso
Community College uh to Mr. Flores and
his team over the weekend. They've been
working on this presentation quite
diligently and so we've got what we feel
will be near final numbers for the
budget. Um this is the first budget
workshop. We will have another um in the
J in the July time frame and then we'll
have the final one in August
>> before
but sure you do when you do that
>> just give us your
>> best guess of worst case
>> sure
>> for what what the state will do
>> will do we'll do but I I want to thank
Mr. Floris and and and his team, many of
that are in the room, Miss uh Miss
Uniga, Miss Dees, uh for all the good
work that they've done on this. I want
to thank the vice presidents for their
work. Um because we do have um budget
requests in here as well. I will be
working. This is the first uh view that
the board will see. I'll be working with
the vice presidents to to attempt to
trim that. They've trimmed a lot on
their own. Um but we'll continue to move
forward. I'm happy to tell you that all
of the budget scenarios are balanced
budget. Um they're all have a surplus
within those. Um so we're in a good
financial position. But with that, I'd
ask Mr. Flores to brief the board of
where we are.
>> Thank you, Dr. Sarata,
Chair Hagerty,
Secretary Graham, members of the board
of trustees, President Sarata. My name
is Fernando Flores. I'm the vice
president of finance and administration.
I will be providing you an overview of
the budget development process this
afternoon. I am joined by associate vice
president Anna Suniga and she put
together the revenue estimate
projections as well as maintaining the
four-year model up update. In addition,
we have Miss Laura Deis, who's our
budget director and guides the process
from February all the way to August.
She's in charge of coordinating um the
budget development process for us and
does a great job for us in that respect.
Uh before I get started with the
PowerPoint presentation, I wanted to add
that the pres presentation today has um
very preliminary numbers in some respect
that will be moving and getting updated
through the summer. And so these numbers
will change as Dr. Sarata said with uh
the next presentations,
excuse me.
And so um also the goal of the budget
development process is to produce a
sustainable budget
at the end of uh the period. What we
hope to present uh for board approval in
August will be a sustainable budget.
That is our main goal. Sustainable.
So this next slide shows the main items
of the presentation we'll cover today.
We'll go over an overview of budget
development process for fiscal year
2526.
We'll look at an overview of revenue
sources for fiscal year 2425
and projected revenues.
We'll look at the 2425 adopted budget
and projected expenditures.
And then these next two items will guide
the budget development for next year.
We'll look at an overview of fiscal year
projected revenues.
Then we'll look at uh the baseline
budget. This is based upon the
submission by all the executive uh level
that's represented here on my right.
And then um that will result in
preliminary budget strategies. That's
more a compilation of the projected
revenues, expenditures, and different
scenarios for your consideration.
And then uh the 4-year financial model
has been updated.
And then we'll look at next steps for
adoption of the fisc year 2526
budget.
I know that many of you have seen this
slide before, but there's a couple of
newer board members uh as part of the
team. So, I will review it again. In
February, the budget workshops are
presented by Miss Stis to district
staff. She holds two workshops per year
where they are updated on uh on the
budget process. If they have any
questions, any new managers are provided
the opportunity to attend. and she
provides hands-on training. Uh people
can log on to their budgets and banner
and so she does a great job with that.
In February also the budget requests are
completed by the executive level that is
represented here today.
March 7th is the deadline for their
submission of budgets. March through
April, the budget office compiles all of
those submissions by the executive level
and produces a baseline budget from
their submissions.
We'll be seeing the baseline budget in
later slides. April through May meetings
are held with the vice presidents to
review their respective budgets to see
if they have any questions, anything
that we can help them with on their
budget development. that's their
opportunity to review what they're
submitting and uh ask us any questions
that we might help them with. In the May
time period, we meet with Dr. Sarata and
present him the baseline budget based
upon the executive level submission. And
so we go over the revenue projections
and talk about any budget strategies
that uh we need to consider any salary
enhancement options that uh might be
supported by the projected revenues and
we have those kinds of discussions.
After that um in July
we're going to review and approve
additional funding requests that have
been vetted by Dr. set that has not
happened yet. So we were that's going to
be our next uh step in the budget
process
and usually results in lower numbers I
might add. So um in June through August
we present workshops to the board as the
as the numbers are firmed up and we get
clarification on any issues on funding
that we are seeking
and then results in August with the
adoption of the budget by the board of
trustees.
This is um overview of the budget
development process a little bit higher
level. Um the process started in
February as I mentioned. We're going to
look at current year fiscal revenues
which are the basis for revenue
projections for next year.
So those are uh impacted by enrollment
uh interest rates uh things that are
happening at the state level where we
base the projections on. Um then we're
going to look at the 2526 budget based
on rollover
of the current 2425 adopted budget and
it's adjusted for any salary savings
from vacant positions and reallocation
of funds by the executive level.
Additional requests are submitted by the
executive levels and are reviewed by the
budget office and vetted for funding by
the president. That is a major step in
budget development as well.
And then we will evaluate salary
enhancement to remain competitive in
hiring and retaining faculty and staff.
So these are the some of the key
timelines that are going to guide us in
our process.
And as a reminder, uh the board has to
approve a budget by August 31st.
So for the current year, this is what
the revenues sources look like. For the
current year, our budget is $166.4 4
million and the revenue sources are
comprised by the largest property tax
property tax revenue 73 million almost
44% of the budget followed by state
appropriations 44.1
at 26.5% of the budget tuition and fees
39 million 23% those are the three
largest categories of revenue sources
for the district in addition we have
self-supporting programs
um estimated at $3 million.
Other income largely comprised of
interest income,
$6.3 million.
And then we have overhead recovery. This
is recoupment of the administrative cost
related to grants and contracts. Grants
and contracts allow for entities to
charge an administrative fee. It's
called an overhead recovery fee. And so
that brings in revenue when we manage
grants and contracts.
So these are the expenditures supporting
the current budget that we are operating
under. And so um the largest category
here is instruction $55.1 million 33% of
the budget uh followed by institutional
support almost 51 million
academic support 20.7
student services 12 million physical
plan 13.3 million
followed by uh public service over here
3.4 4 research 214,000.
Um the classification method here that
we're required to follow is prescribed
by nubu national association of college
and university business officers. So
this is the classifications that we have
here. Uh also would let you know that
this classification is the same one that
you would see in our financial
statements.
Bernie sir instructional support that's
salary up to the in classroom level
right
>> yes sir those that's that's all the
faculty
>> and the faculty and then instructional
support what is that covered
>> so institutional support
>> yeah institutional I'm sorry
>> that is the administrative that is
administrative offices that is uh
payroll accounts payable VP all the all
the supporting purchasing all
>> and Then academic support.
>> Academic support is the labs, the
libraries.
>> Okay. Okay.
>> Counseling.
>> Got it.
>> What is transfers?
>> Transfer.
>> Transfers are uh certain amounts set
aside to be set to certain funds that
support other activities. For example,
the transfers uh we do a transfer for
Texas public education grant of $1.1
million. Texas public education grant uh
is mandated by law from the state. So
that is a mandatory transfer. That's 1.1
million. In addition, we transfer
another 1.3 million to the plant fund
for ongoing projects. And then we
transfer to the athletics program, sport
athletics, and then student activities.
And then uh we we also
we we also we also do a small transfer
to student government
>> that record show that M has joined me.
So I'll go into more detail on the slide
later on for the proposed year.
So this same budget now is organized by
expense category.
So in here what you see is the largest
portion
is going to the staff and faculty
salaries. So over here on the right you
see faculty salaries budgeted at 56.8
million 34% of the budget. And then over
here you see staff salaries at 50
million.3.
And then here you see benefits at 14.2.
2. If you add those three categories,
that represents about 73% of the budget.
So that's probably the biggest takeaway
from this this particular slide that
most of the budget goes to staff and
faculty salaries and benefits.
>> Yes, sir.
>> Utilities. Util go back.
>> Supplies and services. Is that where
utilities is? Yes, sir.
>> So, we're going to pay a lot more for
electricity. You're going to put it in
there.
>> So, uh we talked about salaries and then
uh we have contingency of 6.7 at the top
that contains a bianium reserve
largely in it. Um, we talked about
benefits, supplies and services as as uh
Mr. Xer says that does include
utilities, IT maintenance, software,
those kind of things. We talked about
transfers and then smaller amount to
travel 1.3 million and equipment 1.1
million. In addition, in the blocks
underneath the salaries classification,
you see a breakdown between full-time
and part-time in those categories as
well.
So now we look at how we're doing in the
current year. In the current year, what
this slide does, it compares the adopted
budget right here in 2425. This is the
budget we're operating under. And then
the middle column, what Miss Zuniga did
is projected out what we're actually
going to bring in. And then we have a
variance in a percentage compared to the
adopted budget. So as we can see on the
state appropriations line item, we have
a variance of 4.7 million to the good up
uh 107%.
That is that is because of a dynamic
adjustment the college uh received from
the state. We received additional
funding because of performance outcomes
that were reported. Can you please
repeat that for the judge to hear?
>> I heard that.
>> Wait till you hear how much we're going
to get this year.
>> Is that the 48 is the number you can't
your best yet? I mean you got last
night. Is that it?
>> No. No. This is the current year, Mr.
Xer. And so it's a dynamic formula now
with House Bill 8 with the capacity of
House Bill 8.
>> And so they fund us based on
projections. uh when our actual outcomes
came to fruition uh and we certified
those with the coordinating board um the
funding level was increased um about
$4.7 million based on our actual
outcomes. So that's all the fact
continued this year 4.7.
>> So um the projected revenue is higher
than the adopted budget revenue uh
10.71%.
The next item, overhead recovery. We're
we're expecting a small decline. We're
adjusting that number as we do the
budget development. That is the overhead
recovery from grants and contracts. Um
so a very small decrease there. Under
local funds, the tuition and fees line
item uh comparing the adopted uh revenue
budget of 39.1 compared to the
projection of 42.5.
We have a positive variance of 3.4
million on the tuition and fees. That is
because of the gradual increase in
enrollment
um that is occurring. Uh incidentally,
we ran a report yesterday and summer is
up 12%.
Still holding at 12% up, which is very
good. Uh the fall uh at the moment very
preliminarily is up as well.
Um, so tuition and fees that has a a
positive variance of 8.7%.
Property tax revenue is projected to be
75.8
million. Uh, positive variance of 2.7.
Um, what what happens on property tax
revenue when we budget for that? We
budget very conservatively.
The the tax office
discounts the values by 2.8%. 8%
certified values that they give the
college are lower by 2.8%
of what the valuations are. So the
number that we book is a conservative
number and that's provided to all the
governmental entities in El Paso, the
2.8
uh% because they might have some
lawsuits that are occurring uh re large
refunds that may happen and they don't
want it to hit the taxing the entities
all at once. So it's a very good uh it's
a very good thing that they do on our
behalf. So because of that practice
where they certified lower values to us
um you can see the outcome that we're
projecting. We're going to bring in 2.7
more than we budgeted. So that's the
result of that.
And then we have other income that has a
positive variance of $4.4 million. The
other income, the the big item in there
is interest income. We budgeted very
conservatively at five $5 million for
the year, but our but our interest
income is about $9 million so far. We've
already we we already almost doubled the
budget. But the reason we don't budget
that higher is because interest income
is very volatile. And so it's not a good
uh item to build a sustainable budget
on.
If you budget too high and the interest
rates go in the tank, then that's not a
very sustainable budget. So
consequently, we budget conservatively
for interest and this is a result of
that.
So when we look at that subtotal there,
we are we are looking at a positive
variance of 10.6 6 million for the
current year up to this point up through
local funds. And then we look at
self-supporting projected revenues are
going to be 1.584.
That doesn't mean we're going to have a
deficit. This is only projected
revenues. In a while, we'll look at
projected expenditures. Self-supporting
accounts by definition break even.
the the expenditures should not exceed
revenues. So on this revenue chart uh
when you compare the budget of 3 million
for self-supporting compared to the
projection, it's a decrease of 1.4
million. All that that means is that we
didn't have uh 3 million of
self-supporting accounts active
uh within the college. So overall what
you see here, the takeaway from this
slide is that we're projecting 180
we're projecting 180 million in
projected revenue compared to the
revenues projected in the adopted budget
of 166 is an overall positive variance
of 13.8 million 8.3%.
>> And and when when do we close this? Uh
>> August 31st.
>> August 31st. So uh
>> we got three months looking good almost
14 million for three months next three
months.
>> So you're going to see you're going to
see the $180 million on the next slide.
It's going to carry over to uh the the
budget status slide. So I'm
>> we're fairly confident in 180.
>> We are
So this is the budget status slide. This
combines what we are projecting as
revenue up here. The 180 $80 million
from the previous slide. We're
projecting that. And then so we did a
projection on what we think expenditures
are going to come up to. So we project
expenditures at $145.7
million.
That's what we project out. Um, so
that's going to result in a surplus of
$34.5 million as we project here as of
the end of May.
Now, what you see here is we adopted a
budget uh revenues of 166. We have 180
uh million coming in. So, we exceeded
the budget by 13.8 million. That's a
part of why we have a surplus. And then
on the expense side, we have uh we're
under the expenditure budget by about 20
million. Those two together result in
the surplus that we're projecting of
34.5 million. And that will uh be used
for fund balance to maintain a 25% uh
ratio of fund balance to operating
budget. And then also uh for SAX
accredititation purposes they like to
look at a healthy fund balance. So these
kind of results uh result in good
reviews by sachs and also the rating
agencies look at your performance. How
did you all do? How are you managing the
budget? How are how are you how are your
numbers coming up? How are your
estimates holding up? Uh so surpluses
are um very beneficiary. Ultimately,
after we hit the 25% fund balance using
some of this, there's still going to be
an amount left over that we're going to
move to the project reserve for capital
projects. Those capital projects will
address deferred maintenance and any
capital projects for renovations,
anything related to buildings and
grounds, those kind of things. And as
usual, like most entities, we have more
need than we have money. So, this is
very helpful to the district.
Are there any questions on the slide?
>> Could you um go over the overhead um
>> I know that variance.
>> Sure.
>> And how we reduce that or I know you
mentioned contracts
>> right here.
>> Yes. That overhead recovery and how we
reduced that amount.
>> Sure. So when we're estimating what
we're going to bring in on over
recovery, we look at all the all the
contracts that the college has with
federal agencies, state agencies, local
agencies. Some of those contracts allow
for us to recoup administrative cost.
That's the called the overhead recovery
rate. So for example, uh the National
Science Foundation uh allows us to
recoup 15% of personnel and benefit cost
in the contract. So we estimate what
that number is going to gen generate and
that is overhead recovery for that one
example I have. But some of the
contracts allow for overhead recovery,
some of them do not. Uh one of the items
of contention this year with the federal
government is that they are proposing uh
for the National Science Foundation that
um which was previously uncapped, you
could charge them
uh your internal indirect cost recovery
rate. The colleg's indirect cost
recovery rate is 41%.
That's very nice. So when you see an
uncapped grant, you say, "Hey, we're
going to recoup 41% to pay ourselves
back for having staff support that."
Theirs is getting lowered to 15%. That's
a result of what's happening
in the federal world. So far, that's the
only one on the recovery that's being
impacted. So, this this decrease here,
this movie, uh, shows less activity that
we're having in the grants.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> You're welcome.
>> Are there any other questions on this
slide?
>> I do.
>> Yes, sir. Do we carry uh vacancies at 10
million a year?
So, um right now that's the value of
vacancies as of May. That number is
going to grow.
>> Yeah,
>> that number is going to grow as people
leave the college. Um and and we may not
be recruiting or it's taking us a while
to find somebody
that contributes to that vacancy number.
So vacancies are the result of you know
turnover and so that number is the
dollar value of the vacant positions
that we have
>> but it's also the vacancies that we have
filled the year right
>> some some some take years judge some are
are within this fiscal year some are
within this last couple of months um so
it's it's a variety of all of those
respective areas I've um let the vice
presidents know that they have full
control of their respective budgets. If
they have vacancies and they they need
to merge positions to create a higher
level position, um they need to add
resources to specific positions that
they have full authority within their
respective areas to use these vacancies
in the way that they see fit. They
obviously bring those to me and then I
approve them. Um but um this is a little
larger than our normal vacancy rate. Um,
I I want to say last year at this time
we were probably in the 7 to8 million
range. Um, but we we're never staffed at
100%.
>> So, so um, if you look at the complete
budget, it's 166 million and
approximately 75% of the budget are
salaries and benefits.
>> 121 million.
>> Yeah. So, that's that is what you're
looking at. It's roughly um a little
less than 10%.
>> 10%. Is that is that normal for most
colleges or
>> to be at about 90%? Um I I only have a
couple of college experience. Um but I
would say that in the 90 to 93% is is
about the normal range
>> for for higher ed and for community
colleges.
>> Okay. Thank you.
So moving ahead to the planning for next
year's budget
uh for 2526
the 89th legislature has met and so as a
result of that uh they determine our
near final run appropriation amount
and so uh that's based upon on
performance measure outcomes and uh they
talked about payment methods and refined
this during the current bienium that has
happened also uh the the state uh house
bill 500
increased the funding for community
colleges by $89.5
million.
uh that was because community college
colleges outperformed the forecast that
the coordinating board did. So those two
things have happened. Uh the tuition and
fees that we are going to project for
next year are based upon the tuition
rate schedule effective for this fall.
We have not raised tuition since fall of
2020.
So that is still the same tuition rate
and it's also based upon current year
enrollment.
I mentioned to you that summer is
trending higher, but we're budgeting
very conservatively at at the enrollment
uh for this year. Even if it's
projecting higher, we not until we see
that number. Not until we see the dust
settle do we um budget the increased
amount. So, we're budgeting flat the
current year's enrollment. And there's
no tuition rate increase plan for 2526
property taxes based upon a preliminary
taxable property valuation of 76 or 77
billion
um and new property at 1.6 billion
and a preliminary no new revenue rate of
cents per $100 valuation. This is a very
preliminary
number. Uh these numbers will change. Uh
the the city sends us reports once a
month. This is going to change. It is
going the rate is going to go up and the
valuation is going to go down. People
protest and those kind of things happen.
So that's going to reduce the the
valuation and it's going to drive our
rate a little bit higher. Typically that
rate will change by about three or four
percent. It'll probably go over
>> just a little over 10.
>> Yeah, 10.1 probably.
>> But still the nice trend for the college
if you look at a 5-year trend in 2020.
We were at 14 cents per $100 valuation.
We're capped at 15 cents. We're cap.
We're close to our cap. So as a result
of uh valuations continuing to go up uh
that's driving our no new revenue rate
down which is good because should the
college need taxing capacity we would
have it in case of an emergency like but
we had to hire like 40 faculty several
years ago raised taxes in 1819 4%
uh to hire faculty we had we had the the
gunpowder to do that this creat creates
a lot of capacity for the district.
>> Yes, sir.
>> We benefited last year by a tremendous
increase in property valuations.
Correct.
>> Yes, sir.
>> Okay. What does it look like for the
next year? Does it look like we're going
to hold property valuation same? Does it
look like refunds will lower it? Are we
looking for another big increase? What
is property valuation? We meet we meet
with the central physial district uh D
Kilgore and her team and we get updates
on uh what is happening uh there's a lot
of building going on in El Paso. Uh so
that is uh that that is projecting very
well for property valuations to go up.
So we also um have have come to learn
that over these past few years they've
been uh re-evaluation years. In other
words, uh traditionally the CAD uh has
not reevaluated residential property but
once every three years. Now they're
every year.
>> So the best guess is the net value of
the property will go up. I mean all the
activity up and funds and
>> all the all the buildings.
>> Yeah. You think you think it'll go up
like what maybe 1%. I mean I know it's
swipes. We we have been trending about
um adding about $6 billion per year to
the valuation. Um
>> almost 10%.
>> Close to 10%.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> My my my home went up 41%.
So, and I didn't do anything to the
house.
>> As my wife would tell you,
>> I feel you.
>> Yes.
So last year our valuations were 68
billion. Now we're at 75. The year prior
to that we were at 61 billion.
>> The year prior to that we're at 55. So
we're doing about 67 billion the last
three years
>> between 8 and 10% instruction.
>> That's very good
now that we keep getting the same no new
revenues. So our essentially tax rate
goes down right. here.
>> That's correct. So, the no new revenue
rate um adjusts and we're only entitled
to receive the same amount of revenue we
received last year, but that doesn't
take into account the new property. And
so, as a result, we see um Mr. Flores
and his team normally budget for about a
million more dollars in revenue from tax
annually.
But we have we have the option as a
board, as an institution, that we could
then change our own tax rate ourselves.
>> That's correct. I mean, up to 8%. Yeah.
If if you choose to increase it. If you
choose to lower it, there's no
percentage. But if the board chooses to
increase our tax rate, we can go up to
8% without a um election. If you go
beyond eight, we have
>> We're not precluded from
>> Okay.
>> We're not that. That's um legislation
was passed in the uh 2021
session that restricted school
districts, cities, counties um to they
went from 8% to 4%. Um we we worked hard
at the state level that community
colleges were not included in that. So
our rate has remained at 8%. Despite us
only doing that twice in the last 25
years. Okay.
So another factor um so some of the
other factors in the strategic planning
for the budget development process
there's going to be discussion
consideration for a salary enhancement
for employees
and then as we've mentioned earlier uh
additional funding requests that have
been submitted by the executive level
that are going to be evaluated
for consideration into the budget. And
then the last two bullets uh continued
impact of gaz 68 and 75
on unrestricted net position. So those
are amounts are unpredictable to us. Uh
so uh we we get a hit of between one and
$6 million to our fund balance every
year. So we don't budget for that. But
as you saw by the budget surplus on the
budget status slide previously uh that's
absorbed into any uh surplus that the
college might be realizing. So there
will be impact from the gazsbies. We
don't find that out till about October
when we're closing our books and then we
come back and book it. Uh so we don't we
don't know what that is. That's we're
dependent on the state giving us that
information to book.
Um the last item, um there's another new
Gazsby uh 101 on compensated absences
that we're going to have to implement uh
this year. And so uh we expect an impact
of about $200,000
for that.
>> And what's that cover?
>> So Gazsby 101 is being changed. Gatsby
101 or Gazsby uncompensated absences
says that you have to book a liability
on August 31st
for everything
that you owe in vacation and sickness.
So for many years we've been booking the
vacation
balance that's owed to employees
converting that to a dollar value and
then we pay off 10% of the sick leave
balances that has a dollar value. So we
book a liability of about 4.3 million
and so whenever we book a liability as
an offset to an expense so we've been
carrying that in our books. Now, uh, the
so Gatsby's come back and said, "Not
only do you have to book that, but you
have to project out what people are
going to use in the coming year." So,
we're going to have to we're going to
have to go through hoops to estimate
that like a 10page report that tells you
how to figure out. Miss Zita,
congratulations
on that.
>> So, that's going to result in more
expense to us. So, about 200 $200,000
we're expecting. Who's who's not the
Gatsby? Who who comes up with all these
new formulas?
>> So the governmental accounting standards
board Gatsby
>> Mr. Colleagues
[Laughter]
>> is the standard set setting uh body.
>> Yeah.
>> For uh governmental on the private
sector it's Fazby. We are on the
governmental side. We're Gazsby. So, so,
um, if we don't comply with the
pronouncements, we could get an
unmodified opinion in our annual
financial report. And so, that would be
really bad for us. Our annual financial
report is critical to getting PAL
funding. Uh, governmental entities look
at how our journal controls that. I
mean, that's that has so much impact the
financial report. We don't have a choice
in the Gazbies, Mr. Mr. Hagerty. We
don't have a choice. We have to comply
with that. Oh, I know we have to comply,
but it seems like they come up with a
new one every year.
>> Like I said, GI 68 and 75 impact us
by$und00 million right to our fund
balance when those hit in 2016.
>> So that money just sits there.
>> Boom.
>> Do we get any interest on that money?
>> We do.
>> Okay.
>> Great question.
>> Each Gazby like Gaza has an identified
target
has a different focus. these guys and
how are we how many gases are we subject
to now 75
>> they're up to 101 up to 101
>> how many of those are fully funded
>> as far as none of them result in uh
increased liabilities they they have a
different area of focus they have some
of them can be displayed how you show
deferred outflows and inflows which
won't have an impact it'll just mean
this aggregating information and
presenting it differently yeah
>> but with regards to 68 and 75 we are
fully funed on those
>> we didn't used to be. We are now
>> as far as I mean actual
financial exposure to what is required.
We're we're funded up to but not 101.
>> We don't know what 101's impact is going
to be, but we're estimating at least
currently that it would be a few
hundred,000
>> $400,000
change.
>> We'd be able currently to cover that.
That's correct.
>> Okay. So those are those are the main
considerations in the strategic planning
for uh the coming budget development
process.
So we look at HB8 uh funding model. Uh
as Dr. Sarata said, we got the the near
final runs. That sounds really um not so
final. Anyway, um we we are budgeting
that amount in the revenue projections
for next year. Um and as a review that's
based upon fundable credentials,
credentials of value, 15 semester credit
hours of dual credit. Those are the the
big uh performance measure outcomes that
we're measured by that result in our uh
appropriation. And then on top of that,
if the students that um help us with
these outcomes, if they are economically
disadvantaged academically, we get a
little bump as well, a small amount. So
it's a pretty complicated formula. And
then adult learners, we get a little
bumper.
>> This is a funding model for next year,
right? And this is projected state
funding. And what we're projecting is
that our projected revenue is 48A.
So in other words, we're projecting a
about a $5 million
uh decrease in state.
>> So
>> we're not he'll touch on that shortly.
>> Great question. Uh Mr. the piece of that
is the fast funding.
>> So, we're going to talk about that a
little bit.
>> Would that be additive to the 43?
>> That's correct.
>> Okay.
>> So, we're going to talk about the fast
>> um
>> so these are some major
>> do we have to hire somebody separately
just to keep track of the government
>> the full employment.
Um so these are some of the major rule
changes that have occurred um that
impact our performance outcomes. So
these are the new rules now that are
going to affect our funding. Uh they
limited uh stack credentials to one
award per type per student per year.
Um the new credentials value test for
associate degree. They've shortened the
uh return on investment period from 10
years to five years and they've also
said that they have to have a salary of
$30,000.
If they meet that criteria, we're going
to get funding for it. Um if they don't
meet that criteria, we won't get funding
for it. So um exempted from those uh
from that criteria are education and
healthcare
uh degrees and programs that we might
have. And um also another change is
fundable transfer to private and
independent colleges and universities.
Formerly we only got credit they went to
a public college or university. Now
transfers to private institutions. Those
are called referred to as I cuts
independent colleges and university
transfers.
Then uh they also are maintaining the
credit hour threshold for institutional
credential leading to lensure or
certification. So those are the changes
that have built been built into
that appropriation that you saw earlier
the 43 million those are these changes
are already reflective into that number.
>> What is a new credential?
>> I think I know
>> the first second line.
Oh, the new what he's referencing is um
the current credentials, but what we did
is at the state level. So, I'm gonna I'm
presenting to the board today on the
legislature. So, I'll give you a
preview. I'm going to speak to um
when we start when we worked on House
Bill 8 with the coordinating board in
the legislature, we set a timeline of 10
years. and that within that 10-year
period, every single credential that the
college produces is considered a
credential of value. So, as we go into
the 89th legislative session, so we
started that in 23, we got the first
funding for it in 23. We turn around and
in 25 the legislature meets and the
legislature determined that the
community college sector was overheating
and so they had to find ways that the
dynamic system wasn't quite as dynamic.
So we went from a 10-year time frame to
a fiveyear time frame in two years. So
that's why not all of our credentials
are considered credentials of value now
because some of them take longer than
five years for the student to see a
return on their investment.
>> Just one new a credential is like you're
certified to be an HVAC tech.
>> No, but what the reference in that is is
that the new not not the new credential
the credential of value is what's new.
I was just wondering does that mean that
you're getting paid for adding new CTE
programs?
>> We would we would but but it he's not
referencing credentials. He's
referencing the theoretic how
credentials of value are measured.
>> Okay.
Some other changes are changes in
credentials of value to exclude certain
associate degrees. Um certain uh degrees
are not considered credentials of value
for funding purposes uh anymore. This is
a change. Um if they don't meet the
requirement on the fiveyear uh payback
period and the $30,000 annual salary,
then we won't get funding um for those
credentials if they don't meet that
threshold.
Uh the specific areas that are impacted
are these right here.
We did an analysis of those six zip
codes and we produced 450 approximately
450 degrees in the in those respective
areas. So we anticipated that that would
be a $1.7 million hit to appropriations.
Are these mostly stuff that would take
longer than five years to
>> it takes? Well, because all of those are
intended to transfer.
>> Those are degrees intended to transfer
and so they really shouldn't start the
clock until after the student receives
the balora degree.
>> But they're starting the clock as soon
as the student enrolls.
>> And that was a change from the prior
year. Uh before that it was a 10year
period, but uh their logic was
universities 10 year and colleges are
given 10 year colleges should be twoear
should be half of the 10 year so they're
going to do that
>> the state transition
>> yeah we submit everything Mr. tremendous
to the coordinating board. So every
year, you know, the coordinating board
knows when a student first enrolled
their first time in college student.
They turn around and measure the student
as they go forward. So we submit all of
our data to the coordinating board and
then the coordinating board um um
crunches that data and determines what
they're not. You know, I've gone back
and forth with Commissioner Roser as
well as um Deputy Commissioner Troutman
on some of the measures that they're
looking at. Um, so as we went forward,
they were saying, "Well, it's taking
students five years to earn an
associates degree." And I'm said, "I'm
looking at your data that you produce,
and it indicates that we're taking 3.7
years to produce an associates degree."
But that's full-time students, and
they're looking at everyone full-time
and part-time together.
>> The important thing is that they hire
two people.
So at a very high level view of
community colleges, how they got funded
this year. So for the current year, the
one we're operating in now, the state
had awarded $2.2 billion.
And so because the community colleges
outperformed
um the year, uh there's a supplemental
funding that increased the funding for
the current year to $2.36 billion.
Um and then for next year the amount is
going to increase to 2.4 billion for the
community college. So as as the funding
is increasing
uh the funding reflects all FY26 new
laws and rules proposed at the uh by the
coordinating board August special board
meeting where they'll be approved. Uh
they'll this does not this funding does
not include um opportunity high school
diplomas. I think we are a site for
that. And um third party credentials and
any anticipated uh fiscal year 26
dynamic adjustment or fiscal year 25
setup. Settle means that what you
performed compared to what they
forecasted for you and then they'll
settle off with you if they owe you
anything. That's okay. Now, legislature
ban every two years. Does this every two
years or did you get to review it every
year?
>> Every year.
>> Every year. Okay.
>> Every year. And the coordinating board
will make those adjustments. And so then
we will see funding either go up based
on outperforming or go down. If it goes
down, it's not taken out immediately.
It's taken out in the October of the
following year.
So, this talks about how we received the
funding from the state. Um, this week
we're supposed to receive our last
installment for appropriation for the
current operating year. So, we're
supposed to receive 25% of the current
year appropriation.
uh in September we're supposed to
receive anything that they might owe us
for the current year.
And so that's the FY25 foundation
payment. We're going to receive it in
September. If they owe us any additional
money, they're going to owe us a very
small amount of money
um that's still pending in on October
15th. That's the first payment of next
year's appropriation. And they all just
50% of their appropriation in advance.
So that's the 50% in October 15 FY26
foundation payment and then if there's
any other fisc year 25 projected
settlement
that means that we continue to report
information state and they compare it to
what they projected for us any
difference if they owe us money they'll
provide it to us on October 15.
>> So so all of this you covered up to now
all is how they slice and dice the 48
million at least this year.
>> Yes sir. Wow.
Our two people.
So um the last bullet is uh fiscal year
25 projected setup. What is it? It's the
difference between uh 25 performance as
dispersed compared to how we actually
perform.
That's called keep track our
appropriation numbers and then we
actually reporting
>> and then they recalculate dollars and
then there's a difference that's called
>> set up can also be negatives
>> and some schools have negatives
tact
There's 18 colleges that are that the
runs just came out. I had an advanced
copy of it and that's why I provided it
to Mr. Flores, but they literally just
came out while we're in this meeting um
34 minutes ago. Um to all the presidents
in their areas and 18 colleges are
seeing um a downward adjustment based on
their outcomes. Um the highest Colin
counties losing $3.1 million, Lone
Star's losing just under three million.
big colleges, small colleges or just
across the board.
>> Across the board, but those two that I
just mentioned are are two of the
largest in the state.
>> But for them, given their tax base,
that's no big deal, right?
>> That's correct. Yeah.
>> So, so what's important to note from
those comments and the discussion on
settleup is there's there's inherent
risk in our projected revenues. When we
budget and we project revenues, there's
risk in our budget development. We have
to be conservative because things can
turn and we have to absorb any
decreases.
>> You hear that Dr. Gr.
But let's go back a little bit.
>> So um those are the upcoming payments.
other changes that are happening. Um
so they're also accelerating
there there's several reports that the
college generates to the state that are
required the report of fundable
operating expenditures the RFOE normally
that's due at the end of January so
Laura is going to have to have that
ready by the end of December
so they're accelerating that by a month
um that's that sounds simple on the face
but we have to have the audit done so we
can do that so It's kind of a cascading
thing. We're going to have to push
everything back and organize ourselves
to uh to meet those reporting deadlines
by a month that are different. Uh the
carrot, the community college annual
reporting analysis tool was due January
31st. That's moved to December 31st. Um
the annual financial reports has the
same deadline, but it impacts
information going into those other
reports. So, we're going to have to
finish the audit quicker and compile any
financial statements as quick as
real quick. I mean, just way high level
out of curiosity, how is all this funded
at the state? Davis is this totally
unfunded within the uh the state of
Texas or what I'm concerned about or
curious about is that if if we go
through and get rid of Department of
Education in worst case and you know the
goes to crap. Uh,
do we suffer any kind of exposure if the
federal government goes wild and does
stupid things?
>> Yes,
>> we do. Um, and so the grants that Mr.
Flores mentioned earlier when um the
administration these are grants that
Congress had already allocated and then
the administration said we're going to
cap administrative overhead at 15%.
And so UTEP felt it much more
significantly than we did. But there are
grants that we have as well where that
NSF, NIH, etc. grants when they're
capped at 15% and they'd already been
allocated. I don't have an issue with
saying from this point forward, if you
apply for a grant, your administrative
overhead must be no more than 15%. But
within the rules and regulations that
existed yesterday and now today, we say
we're going to cap you at 15% for what
we've already allocated. that's caused a
lot of havoc across higher education,
not just in the state, but in the
nation. Um, in addition, there's several
grants that the team and I are working
on that the college has that the federal
government has frozen and is in the
process of eliminating. Um and we have
real individuals that are running good
grants that have we we've had for 20
plus years that we are now going to
lose.
>> It's mostly at the grant level
for grants but not the general
operation.
>> It's at the grant level on one hand on
the other hand um it's at the PEL. So
the the the the BBB uh the big beautiful
bill from the House version um was going
to impact 360,000 students in the state
of Texas. um that would lose PEL
completely. Um so that's a significant
impact to to the state and to it would
be a significant impact to us. Dr.
Amaya, can you remind me what we
estimated? We estimated I think $9
million of a PEL hit. And so we
administer approximately $60 million. So
we'd be looking at about a 15% hit to
PEL.
>> And this is an unknown deadline, right?
>> It's on the Senate side. The Senate
fixed a lot. Senator Cassidy from
Louisiana, the chair, um, fixed a lot,
but it has to go back to the House and
the House has to agree to those.
>> Wow.
>> So, things look good for now.
>> That's why you got to be concerned. We
don't know what the government's going
to do.
>> Oh, yeah. I do. And I won't like it.
cut
there. There's another bill um at the
state level that's going to impact this
Senate Bill 1173.
And so um that bill proposes or is
changing the threshold
for competitive bidding from 50 to
$100,000.
Okay. So um that will be effective
September 1st, 2025. That's significant
and brought brought to uh the
presentation today for discussion
uh for discussion because um right now
we take to the board competitive
purchases 50,000 and higher. We have to
take them to the board for approval.
And so um
that is the board's choice, the amount
that we take to the for approval. We
have to competitively build bill them
because that's what the state says. But
that threshold is going from 50 to
100,000 that the state has raised that.
So um the discussion here is for the
board to understand this change
and to consider what in September you
want us to take to the board for
approval. For perspective,
in 2009,
the threshold went from 25,000 to 50.
So the board at that time said, well,
the threshold for competitive bidding
went from 25 to 50, then only bring to
us for approval items, competitive
items, bid, competitively bid items for
50,000. So it changed in 2009.
This is the same happening going from 50
to 100.
So the board can decide what you want us
to take to the board for approval.
That's your decision. You can keep it at
the 50 or you can say we want we want to
move with change statement. Uh it's my
understanding that uh Austin Community
Colleges Austin Community College
requires 150,000 to be taken to their
board. Now they still have to comply
with the 50,000 bidding rule from the
state but their board has decided
150 agreed. That's just an example. I'm
not advocating for that. It's just an
example. But it's your choice
what you would like us to bring. Now the
potential impact if if uh we only take
items 100,000 and more to you, there'll
probably be a reduction of about 60%
in the items that are taken for your
approval. So that's the impact of this.
>> Now, who approves them besides the
board? like if it's going to be at
100,000 and let's say you already
approved it on your end and everybody's
worked on it by the time it comes to us
it's already been vetted by the by the
president and by everybody right
>> yes and there's considerable purchasing
rules
>> right Mr. Gallo has to comply with
>> tons of competitive bidding different
rules that his office complies with
within the law. All of that has
happened. The bid has been evaluated by
a committee and then the best choice
made. It's a very rigorous.
>> So I don't I don't think we've had
problems in that you know with the
bidding process. Maybe many many years
ago there were some issues back
>> that was the judges
he was here
but I'm I'm comfortable with the you
know with moving it to a 100 and as and
then
>> I think they did because of inflation
and the cost of stuff going up.
>> I think that's actually
>> and they've done it from 2009. I'm
surprised they didn't go higher. And
then
>> I don't have any problem with 100,000
>> 100,000 and then getting an information
piece just you know
a routine information
at a board meeting but not necessarily
>> 20
we have this I notic
>> Mr. this he's talking
you get several contractors we we get a
lot of contractors no no but let's say
you were going to bid like the air
quite a few bids
>> for for for that type of work uh we
pre-approved a large pool of contractors
uh maintenance repair and operation
called the state list
August in July August we bring a long
list of recommend vendors for your
review and then for each vendor we put a
threshold that we cannot exceed so that
we can go to them quickly. Many times
physical plan is working through
emergencies
many too many times
um we go quickly to these vendors and
and they're based upon good reputation
uh purchasing tips notes on performance.
So we have a list that's brought to you
and the threshold that we go to
>> Mr.
>> Oh I I was just we have I was going back
they say that there's this composite
bidding process that that a group of how
does that come compared to that doesn't
change with this with this rule right
here?
>> It does not what what Mr. Flowers was
describing Vice President Flores was
describing is exactly um the case. Um
it's similar. We have um purchasing has
a set of uh of of rules that they have
to follow.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's also the one that uh don't you
have that already uh vetted by region 19
also for
>> Yes.
>> So we have pre-approved uh cooperatives
we have couldn't remember.
>> Uh just to give you an idea the
purchasing procedure is 26 pages long
>> only could have 27
but It's a very it's a very detailed
extensive and that area is is always
looking at the law.
They're they're very they're
very good at complying with the letter
of the law very
>> I think that's why we're so comfortable
with it going to 100 because you know
he's such a
>> the controls they're very good controls
within that area
>> and you said Austin went all the way to
125 or 115 so we have that ability to
come December to it's not necessarily
this threshold.
>> Correct.
>> You are correct.
>> So,
>> so that's just for discussion. Just for
discussion,
>> but I think most of us are comfortable
with 100 when it comes to decision
making.
>> Thank you.
>> So, um Mr. here is the financial aid
transfer. uh additional revenue that
we're projecting. And uh th this one
here
um we know it's going to change because
by this point last year we had received
part of this funding. This year we have
not received usually we we are funded by
semester and we have not been reimbursed
for our fall or spring yet. So the
terminology fast here is I don't
It's an oxymoron. Yes,
>> it's that. It's that. So, uh, this
number is this projection is going to
change for us because we we haven't
received the results
of the information we reported for the
fall and spring. So, that will be
adjusted in the next presentation. This
is the best information we have now.
What we do know is the rate for semester
credit hour is going to increase from
$56.87
for semester credit hour for dual credit
or college student to 58.52.
This projection of 5.4 million is
basically from information we did uh in
2024 because we haven't gotten to 25
information. So
um it is going to change but we're still
awaiting payments for the current. So
this is the other part of our
appropriation number that we have in our
projection.
Under benefits we know the state is
increasing health insurance rates by
four by 8%.
And so uh another of the must be funded
items you're going to see is related to
this 8% increase in health insurance and
dental insurance. So we are asking for
an additional 450,000
supplement our budget for health
insurance and then um
>> 25
for the dental indemnity. It's because
of the state increasing that rate. Now,
what we haven't seen yet, uh, so we we
fund 50% of the health insurance costs
and we receive an appropriation from the
state for the other half of about
7,3,000.
We don't know what the new appropriation
is yet. We're still waiting for that
appropriation amount to know. Usually
the state increases their appropriation
for their 50%. We don't know what that
number is yet.
So, these are other things impacting our
budget. development on TRS. We don't
expect a change in the competition. Yes,
sir.
>> So funding funding for education at
state level is is separate for the
community college than in four-year
college than K12 education.
>> That's correct.
>> But for health care and stuff like that,
do they coordinate the whole thing? So
>> we're competitive with UTP on health
benefits or something. not competitive,
but we're not they have to negotiate
theirs at four-year level and we
negotiate as community colleges and that
kind of thing.
>> Well, the way the state funds each of
those respective sectors is different.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> They can't even agree on that.
>> No.
So towards developing the 2526 budget
uh these are the projected revenues
for 2526.
>> Um the first column we compare them to
the current adopted budget revenues that
we have as a basis for comparison. In
the middle column those are the revenues
we're projecting for next year.
So, um, for for appropriation,
we're projecting $49.5
million
in appropriation. That is the foundation
appropriation along with the past
>> 49.6.
>> That's an increase of 5.4 million
12.3%.
uh overhead recovery for the reasons
where this discussion was on overhead
recovery grants we're forecasting a
decrease for that but that's a changing
number still we're as Dr. Sata said the
federal environment is changing so that
impacts our projections so if they take
the cap off of the NSF funds then our
projection may go up a little bit or if
they make the capuh
restrictive, then we'll bring in less
overhead recovery. So, we're subject to
the whims of the state and the federal
government on overhead recovery.
>> Okay. So, the 10 two is what each each
vice president gets to take a chunk of
>> and salary increase that comes out of
the 10 million
>> out of the I'm sorry.
>> Well, if you take our last year budget
and this year budget that you're
projecting.
>> Oh, I see. Yes. That tip two is the
whatever the vice presidents decide they
need in each one of their divisions
in salaries and
>> supplies.
>> Huh?
>> The board determines our salary.
>> Well, it's part of the deal. We got we
got to cover it.
>> But if you can be absent, we won't have
to cut anybody's salary.
But that that's that's the
>> I can guarantee you we're not going to
decrease anybody's but salary.
>> That's what we're looking at judge.
That's that's what we have available to
us as we continue to move forward and
project the budget.
>> 10.2 is what we have to work with.
That's correct.
>> That's all I want
>> based on the base budget.
>> Okay.
>> So moving to the revenue projections for
local funds on the tuition and fees line
item. you see uh projected tuition and
fees of $42.5 million. That's based upon
the enrollment in the current year.
We're budgeting that flat. Um and so
that results in additional revenue of
3.4 million increase of 8.7%
to that line item. And then property tax
revenue uh that reflects the tax on new
property, the 1.666 666
uh million dollars. That's the what we
we will receive from new property.
That's a nice increase. Uh other income
um based when we did this projection on
interest income, the market was very
different. The market the Fed said we're
going to cut two times and then rates at
the end of year going to be at two and a
quarter. Now things turn the other way.
The Fed did not cut and they're
signaling no more cuts. So, it's really
difficult to project out uh interest
income. What we do is we take a very
conservative number, $5 million. We're
going to keep it again.
So, uh that we we don't think will go
under 5 million. So, that number is
sustainable for us. Um
so, then the subtotal for projected
revenues
is $173.7 million. When we add
self-supporting
projected revenues of three million, the
total projected revenues for 2526
are $176.7
million. That's going to be the budget
for next year because we cannot exceed
that uh that amount.
So that's an increase from the current
adopted budget of 166.4 million compared
to what's projected. So, it's going to
be a positive variance of $10.5 million
or an increase of 6.16% of projected
revenues.
So, now we see those projected revenues.
If we were to um disagregate them and
show them by type, uh property tax
revenues expressed as a percentage is
42.2% 2% of the total uh projected
operating budget followed by
appropriations
$49.5 million 28% followed by tuition
and fees 42.5% or 24% followed by other
income which is interest and followed by
self-supporting and overhead recovery
that will comprise the projected uh
budget for next year and that's how the
revenue sources would break
So now we look at the baseline budget.
This is this is all the submissions from
the executive level. This is what the
budget office did uh in the May time
period taking all the submissions from
the executive levels and compiling a
baseline budget based upon what they
submitted. So that middle column is the
baseline budget and you see by executive
level area what those projected budgets
are that they're requesting. And so um
it comes to $162.4
million
compared to the adopted current budget
of 163.4.
That's a decrease of $1 million.
There's a couple of variances that are
large in here. If you look at the uh
$1.2 million
uh decrease there, but you see an
increase in the line item row below,
that's because in the instructional
area, they did some reallocation. They
moved some programs from one area to
another. So, the area they're going into
is an increase. The area they're coming
from is a is a decrease. So, um the
workforce and continuing education
decreased by 1.2 million. However, those
areas moved over to um workforce
instruction and workforce education
616,000.
This reflects the movement of position
vacant positions and filling them at
lower levels. This re this reflects the
movement of positions largely. This will
continue to move all the way through
August the 31st.
This is a baseline budget as of May
31st. Laura's team will continue to work
on adjusting the baseline budget all the
way through August 31st.
So, um, this this is the baseline budget
as we project.
And so when you add in the
self-supporting accounts down here
totaling 3 million, we're looking at a
baseline budget of 165.5
million compared to the current
operating budget of 166.5.
Basically down a million dollars. Yes,
sir.
>> I'm just looking. So So you had a
million2 and you get 66. still 602,000
and you add to that the $278,000 it's
almost $900,000 that you're taking out
of that which is essentially the bottom
line. Everything else balances out.
Where did the other I mean
how come you lost $600,000 in workforce
and somebody's not complaining about I
lost you know oh we gave you $600,000
back. No, you lost you lost 600 and you
lost almost $300,000 out of finance. who
gave that up and what?
>> So in finance the 278,000.
>> Yeah.
>> So we we maintain we maintain a clearing
account. That clearing account uh is an
account is used to fund um other
activities that that weren't originally
budgeted. So if somebody says you know I
really need to buy this software I need
this uh item purchase. It's not in my
budget. the budget, the finance area,
the finance area
will um do a transfer from the clearing
account out. So that's a negative.
>> So you're just saying supplementing it.
>> You're saying is next year I just don't
need $300,000 as much as I did last
year.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> So that's the movement. I understand
that. It's just that all of a sudden
somebody says, "It's strange. See, I
just don't need that much money."
And it seems like workforce and continue
education still is if if you see I gave
$600,000 to instruction in workforce.
Yeah. Well, workforce continuing
$62,000.
And so, okay.
>> If they think they need a better job
with less, well, that's good.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. A lot of these are also based on
retirements, Mr. Oxen. So, you have a
faculty position that's been in the
position for a number of years. We're
recognized at our board meeting. Um,
Russ Meyers, who's a great faculty
member, has been with the institution
for a significant period of time. His
wage has increased every year. And when
he retires, we're able to hire a faculty
member at a starting wage,
>> say $600,000. Well, depending on how
many how many um retire theoretically we
could
>> absolutely
>> it's just good that you can see people
net effect hey I can do a better job
next year I can do as good a job this
year as I did last year as less money
that's it's all right particularly
considering inflation go up 33%
>> Mr. Don't mind me jumping in. A lot of
that 616,000
is reflects the movement of the law
enforcement academy from ADP area to
Josh.
>> But your point is well taken.
>> Yeah, I still I don't you move it, but
you still somebody's somebody's coming
up with $62,000 less. So
>> um another So doing more with less. We
did eliminate some duplication. So we
had two offices running very similar
customized training and grants and
realized with the retirement of one of
the directors we could merge those two
offices into one director. And so that's
some of the savings there as well.
>> I'm not telling you that you know
somebody sneaky would go back and
justify having two offices and argue
that you don't need to give up 600. I
think you did a good job. myself, I
would try to hide that second office and
see if I can.
>> So, it's if I think your your point is
extremely well taken, Mr. Herster, given
the fact that you'll see slightly later
in in um Vice President Flores's
presentation that we're going to make
some adjustments because so when we do a
salary enhancement for our faculty, we
say a portion is going towards the table
and a portion is going towards a
theoretic raise. the employee, the
faculty member receives all of it, but
we adjust the table and we we've never
done that on the staff side. And that's
part of the reason some of those
vacancies are still vacant is because
we're having a harder time competing for
staff, particularly at lower levels of
the institution or starting pay. And so
what I've asked the staff to do is to
make according adjustments to tables for
staff so that in the future we won't
have the same challenge.
>> So you're saying it's all I's fault that
No, I'm saying that that um in the past
it wasn't just something that we did and
I've asked um uh Vice President Flores
and AP Field to work on that for us so
that we don't have as hard a time
recruiting. So you're going to see a
significant number probably in the
$600,000 range. Um that is going to be
an adjustment to tables so that in the
future we won't have $10 million of
vacancies.
>> Okay, that's good.
I still would hide that second office.
>> It's a good thing you're not running
that program.
>> It would be fully justified. I can make
paperwork like you wouldn't believe.
So now we look at the baseline budget.
When you break it out by functional
area, this is what it looks like. Um in
this particular case, uh instruction is
uh still at 54.8
million
right here, representing 33% of the
budget. Uh followed by institutional
support over here at $50 million.
Uh interestingly enough, when you
combine instruction with academic
support,
uh that represents like 44% of the
budget. And that's the way it should be.
uh supporting students and when you add
uh student services to that you're close
to over 50% of the budget going to
supporting students.
So you see how uh the allocation of
budgets is
um additionally in here you have uh as
part of the $165.4 4 million baseline
budget. 20 million is dedicated to
academic support and also um physical
plant 13.2 million student services 122
million uh public service 3.8
uh research 214,000
um over here and then self-supporting
one 3 million transfers of 7.5
million. So that is how by functional
area
the baseline budget would be
distributed.
If we look at that same baseline budget
by expense category,
um then you look at uh it going like 73%
to salaries when you consider faculty
salaries of 56.4 56.5 million and then
you have staff salaries of 50 million
and then you have benefits of 8 and a
half million. uh over 70% of the budget
goes to staff, salaries and faculty.
The rest of it is distributed to
supplies 28 million. Transfer 7.5
a small amount to travel 1.3 equipment
1.1
uh and then contingency up here $6.5
million. This contains a bianium reserve
in case appropriations do not come
through uh something happens at the
state level and they cut funding on
something. This is just in case uh that
is mitigating the risk in budget
development by doing that.
So this is how by expense category the
baseline budget uh which is the starting
point for uh for the budget for the year
is broken down. Now these are the
additional funding requests. This is
preliminary
and so it's broken down into two
categories. The critical needs
um those are must be funded items.
Central appraisal district has raised
their budget. They pass on the prorated
share to the different taxing entities.
Our proportionate share is $69.9,000.
Uh insurance rates keep on rising and so
Mr. Raela projects needing 264,000
more for rising insurance rates. Uh we
talked about Gazsby 101, the impact of
implementing that. It's going to hit
have a hit of about 200,000. We talked
about the 8% increase in health
insurance uh 450,000. Medicare as in
payrolls go up then the related uh
payroll taxes go up. In this case it's
Medicare. We're estimating uh 80,000
increase. The dental insurance is also
tied to the 8% increase from ERS for
insurance rates and then the reserve for
TRSP
uh appropriation. So that's the matching
portion that the employer pays largely
TRS. So we have more employees. Our
proportionate share of that is half of
eight and a quarter. So resulting in
$210,000 more that we're going to need.
Um, and then IT software, some of the
contracts have built-in escalation
clauses, 10 or 15%. So, those are
increases related to software
maintenance that are built in to the
contracts. So, the critical items total
1.665
1,665,000.
You're going to see that number in just
a little bit on the budget strategy
slide. And so these other funding
requests are the ones that are being
vetted by Dr. Sarata
and they're broken out by executive
level here and those total $2.4 million
at the moment. I I can see where that
600,000 you saved me has now been
invested in 1.6 million central. So you
saved me 600,000 and you wanted 1.6
back.
Very good.
So these are the additional funding
requests and the two categories within
that category that are being uh
considered.
So this is where everything gets
collapsed together.
This is one slide that brings in your
projected revenues of 176 million.
And then we just talked about the
baseline budget 165.5 million.
That yields an initial budget surplus of
11.2 million.
Now, we just talked about the must be
funded on the additional funding
requests
of $1.6 million.
And so, the next item here is a 6%
adjustment to the salary tables that Dr.
Sarata mentioned is going to help us
with recruiting and retaining staff. um
associate vice president Melenna Field
and her team have uh done u a process to
adjust the tables by 6%
and so the impact of that would be an
increase of $672,080.
I would say that $400,000 of that uh is
related to uh full-time staff.
The other 200,000 of that number is to
bring anybody making less than $10 an
hour up to $10 and that's about 282
partners.
>> We still have people making less than
10. I thought we agreed at the last even
when Christina was here that they were
going to
>> we've worked on it Dr. Graham and we
have a good handle on it at this point
where we believe that this will cover
all employees. Uh we had a number of
part-time employees that were under 10
and then some of our um uh work study
areas.
>> How many employees?und
it'll impact 125
part- timerrs making less than $10 an
hour. And then on the 6% adjustment,
it'll impact 395 part- timerrs uh
impacted by increasing the tables by 6%.
So part- timerrs are about five four 525
part- timerrs will be impacted by this
increase. Uh there'll be about 127
full-timers impacted as if the tables
are increased by 6%.
And then um there's about 162 vacant
positions that are in recruitment that
would be impacted as well. So all
together uh the 6% increase is going to
impact uh $463,000.
Raising the part- timerrs to $10 up to
$10 has an impact of about $28,000.
all told this uh increase right here
that will help us recruit and retain
staff uh has a current value of 672.
What I would tell you is when this study
was done by the HR by Miss Field's HR
team um it doesn't consider if the board
does a salary increase
then
this table amount will go down
because we did it before any salary
increase. So if you do a 3% increase as
an example for the next year,
the 463,000 will probably go down to
230,000.
So this is this number here is very
preliminary because we don't know what
the board's going to approve as an
increase, but it will help with
retaining and recruiting staff. As Dr.
at mentioned we have a lot of positions
uh the lower levels that are making um
under the amount that these tables would
be adjusted to. So they'll see a bump
from that.
This increase will only affect one
administrative person.
Only one the majority of the rest will
be classified staff will be impacted.
And on the $10 increase
um bring everybody up to $10. only three
full-timers that were affected by that.
All the rest were part- timerrs. So, we
we we uh this process will help align
those dollar values.
I don't know u Miss Field, did I leave
anything off?
>> No, other than how critical it is that
we adjust the tables because it's been
since 2016 that we haven't seen any
tables for the employees. So, it's
critical that we do
So that that has a value of 672,000. So
the these are kind of two items that we
feel uh are very important to uh approve
these two increases and that will still
yield a surplus of $ 8.9 million.
And so um you saw the value of the
additional request at 2.4 million
here. And so um that would leave still
if that was funded an amount to increase
the bianium reserve by $6.5 million. Now
that's the very basic column here. What
you have in the 1% 2% 3% up to 5%
scenarios. We've added the value of a
salary enhancement at 1% in case we
wanted to do some multiples
or half of a percentage. You know what
1% is valued at. But here you see the
value of a 2% enhancement 3%
so forth and so on. If we look at the 3%
column here, what we see is with a 3%
salary increase, which is uh close to
what inflation is, um you still see a
surplus of $3.4 million that would go to
the benium reserve.
So these are these are at the moment
with the preliminary numbers that have
been presented to you um how the outlook
is going forward.
Are there any are there any questions
related to this?
So,
so next we're going to talk about the
4-year uh financial model. Uh it has
been updated
and has current numbers in it uh from
last year. And so this model chooses to
analyze future capacity should we need
to raise something then the model is
available for that. If we wanted to
raise uh tuition and you chose to uh
approve uh uh tuition rates, this model
could project that. If you felt the need
to raise property taxes, this model
could project that as well. It is a tool
to use in modeling different budget
scenarios
that uh might be considered. And so uh
it tracks revenue sources that are
trending higher than in previous years.
Um enroll if enrollment is growing it
can tell you what the impact of that
might be. If state appropriations are
are growing as well and there's changes
we can model that also other factors or
assumptions. It covers two legislative
periods. So it covers four years in case
we need to do that. Uh if you wanted to
As I said, tuition increases which are
not uh on discussion or recommended u
and also it implies steady property
valuation increases and assumes regular
salary enhancement.
So this is a static model. This is a PDF
of the model and so um it has a lot of
information in it and it um has a lot of
pieces to it. And so this is what the
model looks like. And then the second
part of this model shows the impact of
fund balance. That's a little bit
dizzying, I know, but it's the it's the
process we go through in case we want to
consider increasing fund balance. We
maintain a fund balance of 25% of fund
balance to operating
budget. And so those considerations are
in here. It considers transfers to
project reserve, a lot of different
things. So at this point, I don't know
if anybody has any questions related to
the model.
Um
the next steps
going forward,
we'll continue to recruit efforts for
summer and fall registration,
update revenue projections with final
state appropriation numbers that might
be provided. Hopefully, we'll get the
fast funding that will help us uh
project that better. And uh Miss Davis
will continue to compute the no new
revenue rate as she receives updated
information
and and we'll get the final appraisal
ruled in July.
And Miss Stasis's team will continue to
move the baseline budget for vacancies
and hires and all that is going on.
She'll continue to advance it forward
and then Dr. Sarata will be reviewing
additional funding requests that have
been submitted
and then we'll prepare for the final
budget presentation workshop to the
board of trustees which will be in the
last board meeting. uh planning for
adopting the budget. June 30th, we
should get updated uh property
appraisal. July 25th is a deadline for
getting certified values.
Early August there uh might be either in
late July or early August.
>> Probably August. Might
>> uh there should be a board meeting. That
board meeting is very important because
that's where the salary enhancement if
one is going to be passed needs to be
passed for HR to have enough time to uh
update the banner system. So that's why
that is scheduled in early August.
That's a a very important uh date for
us. And then finally August uh the
regular board meeting will u with the
adoption of the 2526 operating budget
and the no new revenue tax rate will be
approved by the board of trustees.
So that completes the presentation.
If there's no questions then thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you Mr. Lewis. Good job.
And we don't need to go on any
concession. So we're
[Music]